---
title: Query
navigation.icon: i-lucide-database
---

Query is a way to create requests (queries) to database, inspired by SQL-like query builders and MongoDB filters.

::tip
Currently, Nexus ORM supports only basic queries. Aggregations and projections are in development.
::

There are 4 types of queries which represent CRUD operations. Each query can be started from `Collection` instance and finished (executed) by one of the finishers.

## Select
::tip
Select queries support [filters](/query#filters).
::

Select queries are used to read data from database. They have 4 finishers currently:
- `one` - returns first result or throws if no results were found.
- `maybeOne` - returns first result or `undefined` if no results were found.
- `many` - returns all results.
- `count` - returns number of results.

```ts
const users = await User.select().gte('age', 18).offset(10).limit(100).many()
const user = await User.select().gte('age', 18).one()
const count = await User.select().gte('age', 18).count()
```



### Pagination

### Sorting

## Create

Create queries are used to create new records in database. They have 2 finisher currently:
- `one` - creates new record and returns it.
- `many` - creates new records and returns them.

```ts
const user = await User.create().one({name: "John Doe", email: "john@doe.com", age: 18})
const users = await User.create().many([{name: "John Doe", email: "john@doe.com", age: 18}, {name: "Jane Doe", email: "jane@doe.com", age: 18}])
```

## Update
::tip
Update queries support [filters](/query#filters).
::


Update queries are used to update existing records in database. They have 2 finishers currently:
- `one` - updates existing record with provided partial and returns it.
- `many` - updates existing records with provided partial and returns them.

Also you can update models directly by passing them to `update` method. Model(s) should have unsaved changes, otherwise error will be thrown.

```ts
const user = await User.update().where({id: 1}).one({name: "John Doe"})
const users = await User.update().where({name: 'John'}).many({name: "John Doe"}) // all users with name "John" will be updated

user.name = "New Name"
await User.update(user)

for (const user of users) {
    user.name = "New Name"
}
await User.update(users)
```
## Delete
::tip
Delete queries support [filters](/query#filters).
::

Delete queries are used to delete records from database. They have 2 finishers currently:
- `one` - deletes existing record and returns it. If record was not found, error will be thrown.
- `many` - deletes existing records and returns them.


```ts
const user = await User.delete().where({id: 1}).one()
const users = await User.delete().where({name: 'John'}).many() // all users with name "John" will be deleted
```

## Filters

- `eq` - check if value is equal to provided value.
- `ne` - check if value is not equal to provided value.
- `gte` - check if value is greater than or equal to provided value.
- `gt` - check if value is greater than provided value.
- `lte` - check if value is less than or equal to provided value.
- `lt` - check if value is less than provided value.
- `in` - check if value is one of values of provided array.
- `nin` - check if value is not one of values of provided array.
- `exists` - check if value is not `undefined` or `null`.
- `regex` - check if value matches provided regex.
- `size` (Arrays only) - check if array has specified size.
- `all` (Arrays only) - check if array contains all  specified values.
- `elemMatch` (Arrays only) - check if array has at least one element that matches all the specified query criteria

**Logical operators:**
- `and` - Logical `AND` operator.
- `or` - Logical `OR` operator.
- `nor` - Logical `NOR` operator.