---
title: Introduction
description: Nexus goal is to provide database-agnostic ORM with strong type-safety and developer experience. 
navigation.icon: i-lucide-house
---

## What is Nexus?
Nexus is a free and open-source ORM with an intuitive and extendable API. It aims to provide strong type-safety and reduce boilerplate code.

- **Database-agnostic**: Nexus is designed to work both with MongoDB and PostgreSQL **(Coming soon)**.
- **App-layer first**: Nexus reduces reliance on the database, by moving as much logic as possible to the app layer. This approach allows for more flexibility and powerful features.
- **Type-safe**: Nexus uses TypeScript as a source of truth for schema definition, this allows for strong type-safety and guarantees that your runtime data is always same as your database schema.
- **Simplicity over complexity**: Nexus is designed to be simple and easy to use, while still providing powerful features.

## Key Features
- **Zod-like schemas** - utilize familiar Zod syntax and validation to define your schema.
- **Type-safe serialization/deserialization** - Enjoy type-safety and control over your JSON/database representation of models.
- **JSON and DB Scopes** - define scopes (e.g. `read`, `create`, `update`) for your schema to control which fields are included in JSON and database.
- **Single-table inheritance** - use inheritance for your models to reduce boilerplate code.
- **Discriminators** - use discriminators to define union types with zero runtime overhead.
- **Hooks** - define hooks to intercept standard db operations (e.g. `beforeCreate`)
- **Model Events** - subscribe to various events (e.g. `onAfterCreate`)
- **Powerful query builder** - use type-safe query builder to build complex queries with ease.
- **Browser support** - use your models in the frontend to reduce boilerplate code.

## Why not YOUR_ORM_NAME?
- **Mongoose** - is most popular ORM for MongoDB, but it has very poor TypeScript support, cumbersome API.
- **Typegoose** - despite it has arguably better TypeScript support, it's still very limited because it's based on Mongoose, inheriting many of its problems.
- **LucidORM** - is a very good TypeScript ORM, but it doesn't have MongoDB support.
- **Prisma** - has its own schema language, making TypeScript a second-class citizen. Unions and discriminators are overcomplicated.
- **ZenStack** - no MongoDB support
- **TypeORM** - very limited MongoDB support
- **DeepkitORM** - very promising ORM, but it's still in early development and require type-reflection overhead, which can be suboptimal for frontend usage.

