---
title: Concepts
description: Learn about the concepts behind Nexus
navigation.icon: i-lucide-sliders
---

Nexus follows the [repository pattern](https://medium.com/@shiiyan/active-record-pattern-vs-repository-pattern-making-the-right-choice-f36d8deece94), in Nexus, a repository called `Collection`.

Repository pattern ensures better separation of concerns, and consequently, better TypeScript support.

The main idea of Nexus is to move as much logic as possible from database to **app-layer**, for example Nexus does default values, validation, cascade operations and events exclusively on app-layer. By relying on the app-layer, developers can use full power of JavaScript without worrying about limitation of particular database. Last but not least, this approach allows to easily switch between different database engines.

## Schema

Schema is based on `Codecs`, which represent runtime type, validation logic, db and json decoder/encoder. Codecs are heavily inspired by [Zod](https://zod.dev/) and use `ZodType` under the hood.

Schema defines the structure of data that is stored in the database, plus additional logic for scope management (`read`, `create`, `update`).

Schemas are responsible for:
- **Type definition** - schema defines runtime type of data
- **JSON Serialization Rules** - schema defines how data should be serialized to JSON, including it's type and allowed scopes.
- **DB Serialization Rules** - schema defines how data should be serialized to database, including it's type and allowed scopes.
- **Isolated Validation** - validation of data, which self-contained and does not rely on other model properties.
- **Defaults** - capability to make fields optional for input, but always present (required) for output.
- **Automatic Timestamps** - capability to automatically add `createdAt` and `updatedAt` fields.

```ts [User.ts]
import {n} from "@deveox/nexus"
const schema =  n.model({
  name: n.string(),
  email: n.string().email(),
  age: n.number().min(18),
})
```

::card
---
title: Learn more
to: /models/schema
---
::

## Model

You can think about models as about schemas empowered with runtime capabilities.

Models are responsible for the following:
- **Computed properties** - computed properties are properties that are not stored in the database, but are calculated based on other properties.
- **Methods** - methods are functions that can be called on model instances. Following SRP and repository pattern, model methods should be responsible with operations limited to the model data.
- **Dependent Validation** - In development
- **Dependent Defaults** - In development
- **Changes tracking** - Provides ability to track changes and perform partial updates.

Each model that you create extends `Nexus.Model` class. You can define computed properties and methods using native JavaScript syntax (class methods and getters).

```ts [User.ts]
import {model} from "@deveox/nexus"

... // schema defined in previous step

export class User extends model(schema) {
  greet() {
    console.log(`Hello, my name is ${this.$.name} and I'm ${this.$.age} years old.`)
  }
}
```

::card
---
title: Learn more
to: /models/introduction
---
::

## Collection

Collections are APIs to work with database tables, you can think about collections as about manager for models. Or if you're familiar with repository pattern, collections are repositories.

Collections features following capabilities:
- **Custom methods** - in contrast with model methods, collection methods are responsible for operations which can not be scoped to data itself.
- **Indexes** - collections are responsible for creating and maintaining indexes.
- **Hooks** - configurable middleware for CRUD operations.
- **Events** - customizable pub/sub API.
- **Caching** - collections are responsible for caching data.

Each collection that you create extends `Nexus.Collection` class. You can define custom methods using native JavaScript syntax (class methods).

```ts [User.ts]
import {collection} from "@deveox/nexus"

... // model and schema defined in previous steps

export class Users extends collection(User) {
  findByEmail(email: string) {
    return this.select().eq("email", email).one()
  }
}

```

::card
---
title: Learn more
to: /collections/
---
::


## Query
Query is a way to create requests (queries) to database, inspired by SQL-like query builders and MongoDB filters.

```ts [User.ts]

const user = await users.select().where({email: "john@doe.com"}).one() // select first user with email "john@doe.com"
const users = await users.select().where({email: "john@doe.com"}).many() // selects all users with email "john@doe.com"

const user = await users.delete().where({email: "john@doe.com"}).one() // delete first user with email "john@doe.com"
const users = await users.delete().where({email: "john@doe.com"}).many() //  delete all users with email "john@doe.com"

const user = await users.update().where({email: "john@doe.com"}).one({email: "john@doe.com"}) // update first user with email "john@doe.com"
// also you can do updates by editing the existing model instance, it's called `save` in Nexus
user.edit() // start change tracking
user.name = 'New Name'
const user = await users.update().save(user)
// or use syntax sugar
await user.save()

const user = await users.create().one({name: "John Doe", email: "john@doe.com", age: 18}) // create new user
const users = await users.create().many([{name: "John Doe", email: "john@doe.com", age: 18}, {name: "Jane Doe", email: "jane@doe.com", age: 18}]) // create new users
```

::card
---
title: Learn more
to: /query/
---
::